Adding a unified narrative doc for data access interfaces (#21078)
MystenLabs/sui: docs/content/guides/developer/getting-started/data-serving.mdx

---
title: Access Sui Data
description: Overview of the types of data access mechanisms available in Sui
---

You can access Sui network data like [Transactions](/concepts/transactions.mdx), [Checkpoints](/concepts/cryptography/system/checkpoint-verification.mdx), [Objects](/concepts/object-model.mdx), [Events](/guides/developer/sui-101/using-events.mdx) and more through the available interfaces, in order to use in your application workflows, or to analyze the network behavior across applications or protocols of interest, or to perform audits on parts or whole of the network.

This document outlines the interfaces that are currently available to access the Sui network data, along with a overview of how that's gradually evolving for a great deveoper experience.

## Current data access interfaces

You can use either of the following mechanisms to access Sui network data currently:

> - Directly connect to [JSON-RPC](/references/sui-api.mdx) hosted by a Sui [full node](guides/operator/sui-full-node.mdx) where the [Mainnet](https://fullnode.mainnet.sui.io:443) or [Testnet](https://fullnode.testnet.sui.io:443) or [Devnet](https://fullnode.devnet.sui.io:443) load balancer URLs abstract a few globally distributed full nodes, OR

Reviewer: Seeing `fullnode` written `full node` always seems to bother me, even though i know `full node` is likely more grammatically correct. In code its always written as `fullnode` but 🤷🏼‍♂️

Reviewer 2: Agree and I've never liked "Full node" (full is also cappied). I'm going to change that soon but for consistency, it has to stay that way for now.

:::info

You can use one of the [future-oriented interfaces]((#future-state-data-interfaces)) that are available in alpha or beta, but you must validate the relevant functionality, performance, and cost characteristics for your application before deciding to use those in production.

:::

### JSON-RPC

You can currently get real-time or historical data from a Sui Full node. Retention period for historical data depends on the [pruning strategy](/guides/operator/data-management.mdx#sui-full-node-pruning-policies) implemented by a node operator, though currently all Full nodes are by default configured to implicitly fall back on a [Mysten Labs managed key-value store for historical transaction data](/guides/operator/data-management.mdx#sui-full-node-key-value-store-backup).

:::caution

Websockets based JSON RPCs `suix_subscribeEvent` and `suix_subscribeTransaction` were deprecated in July 2024. You should not rely on those RPCs in your applications. Refer to [this section](#future-state-data-interfaces) to learn about a future alternative.

:::

### Custom indexer

> If you need object version history or another type of historical data where you may not fully rely on a Full node or RPC provider, or if you have specific query patterns that could be best served from a relational database, then you can setup your own [custom indexer](/guides/developer/advanced/custom-indexer.mdx) or reach out to a [Data indexer operator](https://github.com/sui-foundation/awesome-sui?tab=readme-ov-file#indexers--data-services) who may already have setup one. 

Reviewer 3: Not sure that object version history is the best example here, because presumably the fallback we currently offer would mean you could get that today? In the future it would be a valid reason not to use gRPC, but you would be able to use GraphQL because it would have access to the archival KV store.

An example I can think of would be something like "you want to be able to filter on the contents of your objects/events". That's not something we offer today, nor is it something that we plan to offer in the near future (out of the box).

> If you need object version history or another type of historical data where you may not fully rely on a full node or RPC provider, or if you've specific query patterns that could be best served from a relational database, then you can setup your own [custom indexer](/guides/developer/advanced/custom-indexer.mdx) or reach out to a [Data indexer operator](https://github.com/sui-foundation/awesome-sui?tab=readme-ov-file#indexers--data-services) who may already have setup one. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need object version history or another type of historical data where you may not fully rely on a full node or RPC provider, or if you have specific query patterns that could be best served from a relational database, then you can setup your own [custom indexer](/guides/developer/advanced/custom-indexer.mdx) or reach out to a [Data indexer operator](https://github.com/sui-foundation/awesome-sui?tab=readme-ov-file#indexers--data-services) who may already have setup one. 
```

nit but "you have" seems to read better/clearer to me than the contraction form

If you setup your own indexer, you are responsible for its ongoing maintenance and the related infrastructure & operational costs. You can reduce your costs by implementing a pruning strategy for the relational database by taking into account the retention needs of your application.

> ## Future data access interfaces

Reviewer 3: We talked about splitting the indexing framework out into its own category, sitting between gRPC and GraphQL and adding a visualisation of the whole stack (gRPC -> Indexing Framework -> RPC service) as another way for people to decide what they would use (if they already have an RPC service that talks to a DB, then they only need an indexing framework, if they already have an indexing framework, then they only need to talk to gRPC, etc etc).

Primary interfaces to access Sui access data in future will be:

- Full node gRPC API will replace JSON-RPC on full nodes, and is currently available in alpha. If you already use the JSON-RPC or are starting to utilize it as a dependency for your use case, you would need to migrate to gRPC or GraphQL (see below) within a reasonable duration. Refer to the high-level timeline for gRPC availability [below](#grpc-api).

> - [GraphQL RPC with Indexer 2.0](/references/sui-graphql.mdx) will replace the custom indexer mechanism and is currently available in beta. This will be a combination of a performant indexing mechanism that one could use to load and manage data in a postgres relational database, and a lightweight GraphQL RPC server that will be used to read data from that database.

Reviewer: > will replace the custom indexer mechanism and is currently available in beta

IIUC this isn't quite accurate. We want to continue supporting folks writing their own custom indexers or custom data processors utilizing the indexing framework. Graphql is one such product that leverages the indexing framework

You would still be able to utilize a [RPC provider](https://sui.io/developers#dev-tools) (filter by `RPC`) or a [Data indexer operator](https://github.com/sui-foundation/awesome-sui?tab=readme-ov-file#indexers--data-services) with the above options.

### gRPC API

> As mentioned above, gRPC API will replace the JSON-RPC on Full nodes, such that JSON-RPC will be deprecated when gRPC API is generally available. Apart from the message & request format changes between the two, the gRPC API will come with a couple of key functional differences:

Reviewer 3: The functionality that we currently offer in JSON-RPC will end up split between gRPC and GraphQL (the archival/historical object access is a good example of this), this is slightly different from the fact that after all is said and down, fullnodes will only speak gRPC.

Author: I've already mentioned something related to that in the second point below. Beyond that I think we should figure out a proper historical data access architecture before being specific here.

> - It will have streaming or subscription API endpoints such that you could consume real-time streaming data in your application without having to poll for those records. This support will be a proper replacement of the deprecated Webdockets support in JSON-RPC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It will have streaming or subscription API endpoints such that you could consume real-time streaming data in your application without having to poll for those records. This support will be a proper replacement of the deprecated Websocket support in JSON-RPC.
```

> - It will not have a implicit fallback on the above mentioned [Mysten Labs managed key-value store for historical transaction data](/guides/operator/data-management.mdx#sui-full-node-key-value-store-backup). You would have an option to configure that dependency explicitly though, while other full-node operators or RPC providers will also be encouraged to run their own instance of the key-value store.

Reviewer: > You would have an option to configure that dependency explicitly though, while other full-node operators or RPC providers will also be encouraged to run their own instance of the key-value store.

I still am opposed to this and i think we shouldn't make this functionality promise yet. I think having a proper archival service that clients can explicitly call would be a much more preferable alternative.

:::info

The gRPC API is in alpha and not recommended for production use. Its public documentation is coming soon. Until then, you can refer to [this technical proto spec](https://github.com/MystenLabs/sui/blob/main/crates/sui-rpc-api/proto/sui.node.v2.proto).

:::

**High-level timeline**

| **Tentative time** | **Milestone** | **Description** |
| -------- | ------- | ------- |
| March 2025 | Beta release of the initial set of polling-based APIs | You can start validating the initial gRPC integration from your applications and share feedback on the improvements you would like to see. |
| May 2025 | Beta release of the streaming APIs and the remaining set of polling-based APIs | If your use case requires streaming low-latency data, this would be apt time to start validating that integration. Also, the API coverage will be functionality wise complete at this point, so you can start migrating your application in the non-production environments. |

> | July 2025 | GA release of the polling-based APIs with appropriate SDK support | You can start migration and cutover of your application in the production environment, with the support for streaming APIs still in beta. **JSON-RPC will be deprecated at this point and migration notice period will start.** |

Reviewer 3: Talked about pushing the JSON-RPC deprecation timeline by 3 months.

GraphQL has been a key ask from many application builders, and the overall combination will come with following capabilities:

- Indexer 2.0 will be a declarative framework that you would be able to configure to load different kinds of network data into postgres relational tables in parallel. This change is being implemented to improve the performance of the data ingestion into the postgres database. 
  - In addition, you would be able to configure pruning for different tables in the postgres tables, allowing you to tune it for the desired combination of performance and cost characteristics.
- GraphQL Server will be a lightweight server component that you would be able to use to access the data from different tables in the postgres database. This component will allow for combination of expressive queries due to the inherent nature of GraphQL, which is appealing to the frontend developers.

:::info

> GraphQL with Indexer 2.0 is in beta and its recommended that you thoroughly investigate its functional, performance and cost properties before using it in production. Check out [this getting started document](guides/developer/getting-started/graphql-rpc.mdx) that refers to Mysten Labs managed relevant infrastructure.

Reviewer 3: Talked about describing GraphQL as being in alpha instead of beta.

A sneak preview of how Indexer 2.0 could be setup is available [here](https://github.com/amnn/sui-sender-indexer).

:::

See [below](#when-to-use-grpc-vs-graphql-with-indexer-20) for a comparison with the gRPC API.

### When to use gRPC vs GraphQL with Indexer 2.0

You can use the high-level criteria mentioned in the following table to determine whether gRPC API or GraphQL RPC with Indexer 2.0 would better serve your use case. It's not an exhaustive list and it's expected that either of the options could work suitably for some of the use cases.

| **Dimension** | **gRPC API** | **GraphQL RPC with Indexer 2.0** |
| -------- | ------- | ------- |
| Type of application or data consumer | Ideal for Web3 exchanges, defi market maker apps, other defi protocols or apps with ultra low-latency needs | Ideal for webapp builders or builders with slightly relaxed latency needs |

> | Query patterns | Okay to read data from different endpoints separately and combine on the client-side; faster serialization, parsing and validation due to binary format | Need easier docoupling of the client with the ability to combine different types of data in fewer calls |

Reviewer 3: Consistency (or snapshot isolation) is another key differentiator.

> | Retention period requirements | Default retention period will be 2 weeks with actual configuration dependent on the Full node operator and their needs & goals; see history-related note after the table | Default retention period in postgres database will be 4 weeks with actual configuration depending on your or the data indexer operator's needs; see history-related note after the table |

Reviewer 3: For GraphQL, the 4 week retention period applies to queries (like "give me all transactions that called these functions") and not to point look-ups, which will use the archival service and therefore are not pruned. This is maybe another useful differentiator between the services?

Author: I think we should wait to be more specific here until after we've figured out and have alignment on the historical data architecture. IMO, we would need some mechanism for exchanges or defi protocol builders to access historical data when using gRPC, so we need to think through this.

---
title: Access Sui Data
description: Overview of the types of data access mechanisms available in Sui
---

> You can access Sui network data like [Transactions](/concepts/transactions.mdx), [Checkpoints](/concepts/cryptography/system/checkpoint-verification.mdx), [Objects](/concepts/object-model.mdx), [Events](/guides/developer/sui-101/using-events.mdx) and more through the available interfaces, in order to use in your application workflows, or to analyze the network behavior across applications or protocols of interest, or to perform audits on parts or whole of the network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can access Sui network data like [Transactions](/concepts/transactions.mdx), [Checkpoints](/concepts/cryptography/system/checkpoint-verification.mdx), [Objects](/concepts/object-model.mdx), [Events](/guides/developer/sui-101/using-events.mdx), and more through the available interfaces. You can use this data in your application workflows, to analyze the network behavior across applications or protocols of interest, or to perform audits on parts or the whole of the network.
```
just breaking up long sentence

> This document outlines the interfaces that are currently available to access the Sui network data, along with a overview of how that's gradually evolving for a great deveoper experience.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document outlines the interfaces that are currently available to access the Sui network data, along with an overview of how that's gradually evolving.
```
no subjective points of view in docs, por favor

## Current data access interfaces

> You can use either of the following mechanisms to access Sui network data currently:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, you can use any of the following mechanisms to access Sui network data:
```

> - Directly connect to [JSON-RPC](/references/sui-api.mdx) hosted by a Sui [Full node](guides/operator/sui-full-node.mdx) where the [Mainnet](https://fullnode.mainnet.sui.io:443) or [Testnet](https://fullnode.testnet.sui.io:443) or [Devnet](https://fullnode.devnet.sui.io:443) load balancer URLs abstract Mysten Labs managed Full nodes, OR

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Directly connect to [JSON-RPC](/references/sui-api.mdx) hosted by a Sui [Full node](guides/operator/sui-full-node.mdx) where the [Mainnet](https://fullnode.mainnet.sui.io:443) or [Testnet](https://fullnode.testnet.sui.io:443) or [Devnet](https://fullnode.devnet.sui.io:443) load balancer URLs abstract Mysten Labs managed Full nodes.
```
or here is redundant

> - Set up your own [custom indexer](/guides/developer/advanced/custom-indexer.mdx) to continuously load the data of interest in a Postgres database, OR 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Set up your own [custom indexer](/guides/developer/advanced/custom-indexer.mdx) to continuously load the data of interest in a Postgres database. 
```

> - Utilize a [RPC provider](https://sui.io/developers#dev-tools) (filter by `RPC`) or [Data indexer operator](https://github.com/sui-foundation/awesome-sui?tab=readme-ov-file#indexers--data-services) who have setup their own Full nodes or indexing infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Utilize an [RPC provider](https://sui.io/developers#dev-tools) (filter by `RPC`) or [Data indexer operator](https://github.com/sui-foundation/awesome-sui?tab=readme-ov-file#indexers--data-services) who have set up their own Full nodes or indexing infrastructure.
```

:::info

You can use one of the [future-oriented interfaces]((#future-state-data-interfaces)) that are available in alpha or beta, but you must validate the relevant functionality, performance, and cost characteristics for your application before deciding to use those in production.

:::

### JSON-RPC

> You can currently get real-time or historical data from a Sui Full node. Retention period for historical data depends on the [pruning strategy](/guides/operator/data-management.mdx#sui-full-node-pruning-policies) implemented by a node operator, though currently all Full nodes are by default configured to implicitly fall back on a [Mysten Labs managed key-value store for historical transaction data](/guides/operator/data-management.mdx#sui-full-node-key-value-store-backup).

Reviewer 2: We've typically kept ML name out of the docs. Is it necessary here?

:::caution

> Websockets based JSON RPCs `suix_subscribeEvent` and `suix_subscribeTransaction` were deprecated in July 2024. You should not rely on those RPCs in your applications. Refer to [this section](#future-state-data-interfaces) to learn about a future alternative.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Websockets-based JSON RPCs `suix_subscribeEvent` and `suix_subscribeTransaction` were deprecated in July 2024. You should not rely on those RPCs in your applications. Refer to [Future data access interfaces](#future-state-data-interfaces) to learn about a future alternative.
```

| **Tentative time** | **Milestone** | **Description** |
| -------- | ------- | ------- |
| March 2025 | Beta release of initial set of polling-based APIs | You can start validating the initial gRPC integration from your application and share feedback on the improvements you would like to see. |
| May 2025 | Beta release of streaming APIs and the remaining set of polling-based APIs | If your use case requires streaming low-latency data, this would be apt time to start validating that integration. Also, the API coverage will be functionality wise complete at this point, so you can start migrating your application in the non-production environments. |
| July 2025 | GA release of polling-based APIs with appropriate SDK support | You can start migration and cutover of your application in the production environment, with the support for streaming APIs still in beta. |
| September 2025 | GA release of scalable streaming APIs | If your use case requires streaming low-latency data, you can now use those APIs at scale. **JSON-RPC will be deprecated at this point and migration notice period will start.** |

> | June 2026 | End of migration timeline | **JSON-RPC will be fully deactivated at this point.** This timeline assumes about 9 months of migration notice period. |

Reviewer 4: I am maybe a bit out of the loop, but are we confident in these timelines?

Author: We discussed these a couple of weeks back and had shared the plan internally. And these have been again reviewed by @bmwill.

| May 2025 | Beta release of streaming APIs and the remaining set of polling-based APIs | If your use case requires streaming low-latency data, this would be apt time to start validating that integration. Also, the API coverage will be functionality wise complete at this point, so you can start migrating your application in the non-production environments. |
| July 2025 | GA release of polling-based APIs with appropriate SDK support | You can start migration and cutover of your application in the production environment, with the support for streaming APIs still in beta. |
| September 2025 | GA release of scalable streaming APIs | If your use case requires streaming low-latency data, you can now use those APIs at scale. **JSON-RPC will be deprecated at this point and migration notice period will start.** |
| June 2026 | End of migration timeline | **JSON-RPC will be fully deactivated at this point.** This timeline assumes about 9 months of migration notice period. |

See [below](#when-to-use-grpc-vs-graphql-with-indexer-20) for a comparison with GraphQL RPC with Indexer 2.0.

> ### GraphQL RPC with Indexer 2.0

Reviewer 3: Should "Indexer 2.0" be its own section? People may also be curious about when they should use that vs the indexing framework, vs GraphQL.

Author: Carved it out into its own section, but kept the release timeline consolidated for both.

| Query patterns | Okay to read data from different endpoints separately and combine on the client-side; faster serialization, parsing and validation due to binary format | Need easier decoupling of the client with the ability to combine different types of data in fewer calls; data will be consistent across the underlying queries, including for paginated results |
| Retention period requirements | Default retention period will be 2 weeks with actual configuration dependent on the Full node operator and their needs & goals; see history-related note after the table | Default retention period in postgres database will be 4 weeks with actual configuration depending on your or a data indexer operator's needs; see history-related note after the table |
| Streaming needs | Will include a streaming or subscription API before beta release | Subscription API is planned but will be available after GA |
| Incremental costs | Little to no incremental costs if already using Full node JSON-RPC | Somewhat significant incremental costs if already using Full node JSON-RPC and if retention period & query patterns differences are insignificant |

:::note

> Above table only mentions the default retention period for both options. The expectation is that it should be reasonable for you or a Full node / data indexer operator to configure that to a few times higher without impacting the performance significantly, but relevant guidelines will be shared before each option's respective GA release. Those will include recommendations for how to access historical data beyond the configured retention period.

Reviewer 3: This note doesn't really capture the fact that GraphQL *can* talk to KV store -- i.e. it is an interface for the archival store, while gRPC will not be.

Author: I've tweaked the language to reflect that. Though as an internal note, we do need to figure out a good mechanism for historical data access for folks using gRPC :)
